feat: Add packaging guide entry on dependency locking (#669)
pyOpenSci/python-package-guide: package-structure-code/declare-dependencies.md

How to specify dependencies
When you use different specifiers
:::

## Dependency Locking

In addition to declaring dependencies in `pyproject.toml`, it is common for
packages to lock down exact versions of all their dependencies in a separate
lock file. A lock file provides benefits of reproducibilty, security, and
potentially faster installs, among other things.

### `pyproject.toml` vs lock file
* `pyproject.toml`: provides the range of requirements for others to

> use your package in their project.

Reviewer: maybe "specifies **all the possible versions** that can be used with the package" 

so it can be contrasted more easily with "the **exact** set of versions used during development"

Author: Changed: 51df0f9c83689287b3d9913e584a662b889c018c

* **lock file**: records a fully resolved environment for working with or on
your package directly

:::{admonition} Official Lock File
:class: note
As of March 2025, [PEP 751](https://pep.python.org/pep-0751) defined a standard
`pylock.toml` format to unify the various lock file formats in use by other
package managers (e.g. `uv.lock`, `poetry.lock`, `pdm.lock`). Most package
managers provide ways to generate a PEP 751 compatible file. See [PyPA
specification](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/pylock-toml/)
for up-to-date formatting info on `pylock.toml`
:::

> ### How to work with lock files?

Reviewer: I think right above this we need a section like "why are lockfiles good" or "why do they exist" to orient people to what they are doing and why before getting into how to work with them.

something like "lockfiles create a predictable development environment that helps reduce problems where code runs on one person's machine but crashes on another. together with CI result logs, they are a versioned record of the exact set of code that passed or failed the tests. for applications (as opposed to libraries) that are intended to be used as-is rather than depended on by other packages, they allow someone to install and run it and be confident that it will work, without accidentally installing a more recent version of some dependency that is incompatible"

Author: Added more motivation for lock files in line with your points in the intro paragraph: 88d6b786c3ff320f3ab0b014ef2eda0084c6333f

> Lock files are not maintained manually. Package managers and IDEs provide tools

Reviewer: maybe not "written" manually - their maintenance can be automated but you do have to do it

Author: Agreed. "written" makes more sense. Changed 185b382fab8d4f3dbe7b3c750f1cda551815761c

to create, update, and reformat lock files as needed. Below are common package

> manager CLI workflows for lock files:

Reviewer: maybe before the examples, we give a sense of the kinds of operations that need to be done in prose:

- create the lockfile
- update the lockfile
- update a single package in the lockfile
- creating different forms of the lockfile for different python versions, OSes, etc.

Author: Changed: cd2c12f1a56a602d1e5b7d1478c28b90b1e0948a
Doesn't seem like PDM supports updating a single package in the lockfile like uv and poetry apart from some workaround using the `--constraint` arg so I left that out of the examples. I figure people will go to the linked docs if they really are going to use lock files and want to see tool specific workflows.

Reviewer: It does!

https://pdm-project.org/en/latest/reference/cli/#update_2

> Positional Arguments:
> 
>    packages: If packages are given, only update them

It looks like the links in the docs are a little wonky, where the narrative docs link to the wrong place in the CLI docs.

I'll double check this later when at keyboard

Author: Ah. The docs said "Update package(s) in pyproject.toml" instead of in lock file so I skipped over that but I see now what it means. Added: bd49ceb832d0e9369544a1018b1ed7150590d040

Reviewer: The docs are def a little messy on pdm, trying to help out a bit with that atm

> uv export --format pylock.toml -o pylock.toml # export uv.lock -> pylock.toml
> uv pip sync pylock.toml                       # install from pylock.toml
```
See [official docs](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/concepts/projects/sync/) for more details
:::

:::{tab-item} Poetry
```sh
# Create a poetry.lock file based on pyproject.toml
> poetry lock

# Update poetry.lock
> poetry update

# Install packages into environment based on poetry.lock
> poetry sync

```
PEP 751 pylock.toml not yet supported (track progress on [GitHub](https://github.com/python-poetry/poetry/issues/10356))

See [official docs](https://python-poetry.org/docs/basic-usage/#installing-dependencies) for more details
:::

:::{tab-item} PDM
```sh
# Create a pdm.lock file based on pyproject.toml
> pdm lock

# Update pdm.lock
> pdm update

# Install packages into environment based on pdm.lock
> pdm sync

# PEP 751 pylock.toml support
> pdm export -f pylock -o pylock.toml  # export pdm.lock -> pylock.toml
> pdm lock --lockfile pylock.toml      # install from pylock.toml
```
See [official docs](https://pdm-project.org/latest/usage/lockfile/) for more details
:::

::::

### Should I use a lock file?

> Most package managers will maintain a lock file automatically for you (e.g. uv,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most package managers will generate a lock file automatically for you (e.g. uv,
```

Author: Changed: 7ad8080fa353526c1188f25cb6f3b9ca52bc257b

Poetry, PDM). The real question is when you version control the lock file as
part of your package.

:::{admonition} Rule of Thumb
:class: tip
If your project is an application others use directly, include a lock file as
the recommended environment.

If your project is a library to be used in other projects and it is mature
enough to have CI, include a lock file for CI and contributors.

> :::

Reviewer: two options that are both "use a lockfile" could probably just be simplified to:

"**yes, you should version the lockfile**

Author: The intended carve out here is a sole maintainer library with limited users and potentially no testing set up yet (e.g. grad student trying to share their library within their university). 

I was also trying to address the points raised by @ucodery in the original issue: "it should be noted that locking is not a always-yes". It may be worth them elaborating on the cases they had in mind. The above is the main one I can think of.

Reviewer: Aha. Ok. I still think committing the lockfile would be good in that case too, so that years later when you come back to your one-off script you can actually run it, but if there are cases where others think you shouldn't version the lockfile, just want to make sure this is a clear "do version the lockfile if/do not version the lockfile if" distinction (IMO, with the "default" suggestion being to version it)

There is some maintenance cost from lock files. Maintainers should aim to update
the lock file neither too rarely nor too often.
* Too rarely means you risk missing updates with bugfixes, security patches,
performance improvements, etc.
* Too often means you may introduce bugs or even security vulnerablilites before
maintainers of your dependencies catch them. Package managers are starting to
support [dependency cooldowns](
https://blog.pypi.org/posts/2026-04-02-incident-report-litellm-telnyx-supply-chain-attack/#dependency-cooldowns

> ) to mitigate this.

Reviewer: with dep cooldowns, i think only the 'too rare' case is a problem. I would probably frame this as "one risk when developing using lockfiles is that your lockfile will fall too far behind the most recent versions of your dependencies. When people install your package, they typically will not be using your lockfile, and will install the latest versions of the packages supported by their environment. If your dependencies update and break something you rely on, you might not notice it until someone reports it to you."

Reviewer: to be more specific, i basically think we should just say "you should use dependency cooldowns" as an unambiguous recommendation, but then on the other end give a bit of discussion to build intuition about why not updating frequently would be bad, which is the more common problem to have.

Author: I agree "too rare" is the more likely situation. As far as falling behind on package updates, is there anything beyond bugfixes, security patches, and performance improvements that should be mentioned as reasons to update?

Regarding people installing your package and ignoring lock files (presumably for the case of a library), I intended the tip at the end about CI testing different environments to address this.

A discussion on dependency cooldowns seems best added into sections on building packages and CI as it's something that should be added to tool configs instead of invoked when generating a lock file

Reviewer: > reasons to update

well the main one w.r.t. keeping lockfiles updated is detecting backwards incompatible API changes in the deps. Different reasons for updating for package consumers at install time vs. updating locked deps at Dev time, and different considerations for libs vs. Apps. But for the sake of this section I think we can give simple guidance like "use dep cooldowns and update & test lockfile frequently"

>  I intended the tip at the end about CI testing different environments to address this.

I'll take another full read later to see how reading flow goes, on phone rn

>  it's something that should be added to tool configs instead of invoked when generating a lock file

I'm not sure what you mean, dep cooldowns are something that can both be done by the consuming installer (ignoring lockfile) and configured for the lockfile resolver, and both should be done. Since goal here is to give intuition and "best practices" guidance, we should just say "you should configure your package to use dep cooldowns when locking" - I think all the major package managers support this now, I just pulled this into pdm a week or two ago

Author: > But for the sake of this section I think we can give simple guidance like "use dep cooldowns and update & test lockfile frequently"

Gotcha. Added a new recommendation box: 7fb2aa9942e38bd80b64cf03a61b61de09bb3297

> I'm not sure what you mean

I just meant I don't normally see people call sync with cooldown CLI args `uv sync --exclude-newer "3 days"` and instead put it in a user or project config
```
[tool.uv]
exclude-newer = "3 days"
```
so that its not something you have to remember every time you make/update lock files. In either case the recommendation to use cooldowns was added above.

Reviewer: Ok ya totally, on the same page. Asking ppl to remember a special set of params on every invocation is no good.

When you decide to update a lock file, consider what changed before committing
it to the project. Good changes to focus on are
1) major version updates (e.g.  `pandas 2.X.X` -> `pandas 3.X.X`)

> 2) new transitive dependencies (i.e. not part of your `pyproject.toml`)

Reviewer: I personally don't read the lockfile when it updates, and so we might not want to give the impression to newbies that it's normal to read lockfile changes since it can be daunting. My pattern is basically "update the lockfile, run the tests." maybe i'll keep a loose eye for transitive dependencies if e.g. something suddenly starts pulling in a huge dep like scipy or something. maybe the thing to communicate is like "what to do if you update and a new version breaks your stuff" and how to handle adding e.g. temporary version caps

Author: Clarified its not necessary and that testing is more important: a1664bcd83d4ae5ac3852a403901939be38eeaae

Reviewer: I like the changed language, when others get around to reviewing this I imagine there will be more said on version capping, which is a hot topic for us lol, but this is one case where it makes sense - the version range should reflect the range of versions that work for a given state of the package. Ideally one would just adapt to the changes in the upstream dep (and maybe scooch up the dep version floor if the changes aren't backwards compatible), but cutting a release with a version cap temporarily until you can make the fix so that it actually runs when people install it is a reasonable case for a cap.

:::{tip}
A lock file captures one tested environment, not the full compatibility range
declared in `pyproject.toml`. Projects that use lock files should still have CI
test other environments such as

1) the latest packages consistent with your `pyproject.toml`, subject to
dependency cooldowns. This lets you know if a dependency update breaks your
package.
2) older supported versions of Python to let you know if a recent change to your
package no longer works with an older Python release.

> :::

Reviewer: I have done this, where i have one branch of the tests run with a pip install and the rest run with the lockfile as a sentinel, we might want to add a bit more scaffolding in the form of an example CI action for this. Usually I just to that on linux with latest python.

Author: Seems good to reference the testing section here and then add an example there. To avoid the combinatoric explosion of maintaining guides on local vs CI testing, for various tools (e.g. nox, hatch, GitHub Actions), with and without lock files, what are your thoughts on making a high level point that testing can setup environments from a lock files instead of resolving at runtime, showing one example replacing `run: python -m pip install ...` with `run: uv sync --frozen`, and the linking to documentation for various tools?

Reviewer: Yeah, good point, agreed. Don't need a full CI example for this, having just one CI example for updating the lockfile is plenty for one page. Just having like a two line thing like

```
# install most recent dependencies compatible with [project.dependencies]
python -m pip install .

# install exact versions in lockfile
uv sync --frozen
```

As you say is probably plenty. I can imagine that helping generally with "wait when would I do one command vs the other" and "what does pip do/what does uv do" confusion as well.

Author: Added a dropdown box giving more detail on cooldowns: 69d49dde746c253bc8e7339cb16cada50db8cec5

I am not familiar with hatch and nox workflows but after a quick search I wasn't seeing how to enable cooldowns or just calling uv instead of pip. The most recent pip releases have a PIP_UPLOADED_PRIOR_TO env var that can be used so perhaps that is the solution to recommend for the Tests section.

::::{dropdown} What about `requirements.txt`
:icon: info
:color: primary

Older approaches to locking used `pip freeze` to generate a `requirements.txt`
that got used as a lock file. These are minimal lock files that pin a specific
version for the system on which the command was run. They might look like
```
# requirements.txt
numpy==2.4.6
plotly==6.7.0
pyzmq==27.1.0
```

However, this minimal level of specificity has several downsides making lock
files the preferred format:
* The versions satisfying `pyproject.toml` may differ between your MacOS and the

> Linux server your CI runs on. Lock files contain platform-specific resolutions

Reviewer: platform and python version deps are the main things that my lockfiles vary by: maybe generalized like "lockfiles can be customized to include all the different versions that are applicable across different operating systems, python versions, and other platform markers, while that information can only be stored in requirements.txt files through file naming conventions."

idk that text isn't very clear either, but something like that

Author: Clarified: 88f7445d28b710df1c4eeee00821fc7eaef07cf6

* Packages can get updated without a version update for both legitimate and

> malicious reasons. Lock files specify exact hashes to catch this.

Reviewer: this need a bit more explanation, folks might not know what a hash is. maybe show a comparison of the information in requirements.txt and a lockfile first, and then say "those hashes are a unique signature for the code. if you only specified the version, then anything could tell you that it's that package at that version, but if you have a locked hash, you can compute the hash of the thing you're about to install and be positive that it's exactly the thing that is specified." (modulo hash collisions)

Author: Clarified: 71190c264685eacf992ec4aed4fba250992f984f

dependency cooldowns. This lets you know if a dependency update breaks your
package.
2) older supported versions of Python to let you know if a recent change to your
package no longer works with an older Python release.

:::

::::{dropdown} What about `requirements.txt`
:icon: info
:color: primary

Older approaches to locking used `pip freeze` to generate a `requirements.txt`
that got used as a lock file. These are minimal lock files that pin a specific
version for the system on which the command was run. They might look like
```
# requirements.txt
numpy==2.4.6
plotly==6.7.0
pyzmq==27.1.0
```

However, this minimal level of specificity has several downsides making lock
files the preferred format:
* The versions satisfying `pyproject.toml` may differ between your Windows
laptop and the Linux server your CI runs on. A single lock file contains the
information needed to build platform specific and Python version specific
environments. In contrast, a separate `requirements.txt` files is needed to
store this information (e.g. `requirements.ci.txt`,
`requirements.py313-macos.txt`)
* Packages can get updated without a version update for both legitimate and

> malicious reasons. Lock files include package hashes to catch this. A hash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
malicious reasons. Lock files include package hashes to catch this. A [hash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hash_function)
```

Author: Added: 42d5c8a83bbc0a303c1bd351bcf405e26ca41188

> number is a unique signature computed from the code and any change to the code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is a unique signature computed from the code and any change to the code
```

(Sorry can't select multiple lines on mobile)

Author: Removed: 42d5c8a83bbc0a303c1bd351bcf405e26ca41188

How to specify dependencies
When you use different specifiers
:::

## Dependency Locking

In addition to declaring dependencies in `pyproject.toml`, it is common for
packages to lock down exact versions of all their dependencies in a separate
lock file. A lock file provides benefits of reproducibility, security, and
potentially faster installs, among other things. Pinning the exact dependency
versions used in a project eliminates "works on my machine" bugs and gives CI a
reproducible baseline. For applications meant to be run rather than imported,
lock files also ensure anyone installing the project gets a known-good set of
dependencies instead of whatever happens to be latest.

### `pyproject.toml` vs lock file

> * `pyproject.toml`: defines all environments you intend to support for users
> importing your package into their project.
> * **lock file**: defines a specific environment used for development

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `pyproject.toml`: defines *all* possible versions for dependencies you intend to support for users
importing your package into their project.
* **lock file**: defines *one specific* set of dependencies and versions used for development
```

maybe pedantic, this use of 'environments' is a little ambiguous to me - the "environment" to me is the thing that surrounds and contains the software, so a lockfile can be used to *create* an environment, but it doesn't necessarily *define* the environment.

Author: I think my understanding of environment is similar to yours. I intended the word to mean the same thing as environment does in virtual environment. So an environment for python is everything that goes into .venv. To me a lockfile can be used to create a .venv only because it defines possible .venv that a package manager can create.

users install your package but encounter an issue rather than being restricted
from installing your package by the `pyproject.toml` when it would otherwise
work.

A lock file is the opposite. If it installs, the resulting environment should
work even if this means some valid environments are excluded.

:::{admonition} Standardized Lock File
:class: note
As of March 2025, [PEP 751](https://peps.python.org/pep-0751) defined a standard
`pylock.toml` format to unify the various lock file formats in use by other
package managers (e.g. `uv.lock`, `poetry.lock`, `pdm.lock`). Most package
managers provide ways to generate a PEP 751 compatible file. See [PyPA
specification](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/pylock-toml/)
for up-to-date formatting info on `pylock.toml`
:::

### How to work with lock files?

Lock files are not written by hand. Package managers and IDEs provide tools
to create, update, and reformat lock files as needed.

1) **Create** - Package managers often do this automatically though it can be
done manually. For example, calling `uv add numpy` will automatically create a
`uv.lock` file, setup the environment, and install numpy.

> 2) **Update** - This is not done automatically by package managers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2) **Update** - Specifically, update the dependency versions and hashes specified in the lockfile. This is not done automatically by package managers.
```

might be unclear what it means to update the lockfile

Author: I figure a reader assumes update means the content of the file changes and I was happy to put off elaborating on what changes in the file until later where the guide can emphasize what of the changes to pay attention to, have links for what a hash is, etc.

Maintainers can choose to do this manually or setup their own automated
workflow. Updates can be for specific packages or all dependencies.
3) **Reformat** - Package managers currently use native formats (e.g.
uv uses `uv.lock`) and provide tools for converting into `pylock.toml` and other
formats (e.g. `requirements.txt`) when needed

Below is the uv CLI workflow for lock files:

```sh
# Create a uv.lock file based on pyproject.toml
> uv lock

# Update uv.lock
> uv lock --upgrade
> uv lock --upgrade-package pandas

# Install packages into environment based on uv.lock
> uv sync

# PEP 751 pylock.toml support
> uv export --format pylock.toml -o pylock.toml # export uv.lock -> pylock.toml
> uv pip sync pylock.toml                       # install from pylock.toml
```
See [official docs](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/concepts/projects/sync/) for more
details. If working on a package that uses Poetry or PDM instead of uv, the relevant docs can
be found [here](https://python-poetry.org/docs/basic-usage/#installing-dependencies)
and [here](https://pdm-project.org/latest/usage/lockfile/) respectively.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
details. See also the relevant docs for [Poetry](https://python-poetry.org/docs/basic-usage/#installing-dependencies) 
and [PDM](https://pdm-project.org/latest/usage/lockfile/).
```
brevity, make the link text be the software name

### Should I use a lock file?

Most package managers will generate a lock file automatically for you (e.g. uv,
Poetry, PDM). The real question is when you version control the lock file as
part of your package.

:::{admonition} Recommendation: Versioning a lock file
:class: tip

> If your project is an application others use directly, include a lock file as
> the recommended environment.
> 
> If your project is a library to be used in other projects and it is mature
> enough to have CI, include a lock file for CI and contributors. For a small
> library only you maintain that is shared amongst people you know, waiting to add
> a lock file is not an issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, **you should version the lockfile.**

For small projects not intended for general use,
where versioning the lockfile adds more overhead than it's worth,
the lockfile can be excluded from version control.
```

i still think this language is a bit confusing. We really only have one case where we might not recommend versioning the lockfile, and so it's easier to just say "version the lockfile, except for..."

Author: Agreed. I still want to keep the application/library distinction in the advice so I modified your suggestion for the "except for ..." section: 9dd3a8640453ce71bf3c09d010a20bdd7e45d61d

:::

> :::{admonition} Recommendation: Which format to version control
> :class: tip
> Version control the standard `pylock.toml` format.
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::{admonition} Recommendation: Which lockfile format to use
:class: tip
Use the standard `pylock.toml` format.
:::
```

not only which format to version, but also which to use - it would be sort of a pain in the ass imo to have multiple lockfile formats in parallel

Author: This isn't really supported though. `uv` can export to and install from pylock.toml but it still creates a uv.lock and manages that automatically. One has to manually export to a pylock.toml and commit that if uv.lock changes.

Reviewer: oh that's really annoying. pdm lets you just use one. that sounds like a lock-in kind of design to me that i am not a huge fan of, but not relevant to this PR

where new packages are commonly tested first. Automated testing code that
resolves `[project.dependencies]` every time
```sh
> python -m pip install .
```
can be replaced with
```sh
> uv lock --exclude-newer "3 days"`
```
or can be replaced with lock file based installations
```sh
> uv sync --frozen
```
Support for this varies across automated testing frameworks (e.g. hatch, nox) so
consult their documentation for how to install dependencies from lock files with
dependency cooldowns.
::::

When you decide to update a lock file, make sure to test that the resulting
environment works before committing. If it fails because of some dependency
update, then it may be necessary to update `pyproject.toml` to cap the supported
versions of that dependency unless/until the code can be updated to support it.

It can also be good, though not necessary, to double check what changed when
updating a lock file. The diff can be noisy so the main changes to focus on are
1) major version updates (e.g.  `pandas 2.X.X` -> `pandas 3.X.X`)
2) new transitive dependencies (i.e. not part of your `pyproject.toml`)

:::{tip}
A lock file captures one environment for CI testing, not the full compatibility

> range declared in `pyproject.toml`. Projects that use lock files should still

Reviewer: ```suggestion
range declared in `pyproject.toml`. Projects that use lock files may want to
```

optional, extra steps, not necessarily a 'should'

lock file. A lock file provides benefits of reproducibility, security, and
potentially faster installs, among other things. Pinning the exact dependency
versions used in a project eliminates "works on my machine" bugs and gives CI a
reproducible baseline. For applications meant to be run rather than imported,
lock files also ensure anyone installing the project gets a known-good set of
dependencies instead of whatever happens to be latest.

### `pyproject.toml` vs lock file
* `pyproject.toml`: defines all environments you intend to support for users
importing your package into their project.
* **lock file**: defines a specific environment used for development

`pyproject.toml` should be permissive, erring on the side of allowing too much
even if it may allow untested environments. In most cases, it is better that
users install your package but encounter an issue rather than being restricted
from installing your package by the `pyproject.toml` when it would otherwise
work.

A lock file is the opposite. If it installs, the resulting environment should
work even if this means some valid environments are excluded.

:::{admonition} Standardized Lock File
:class: note

> As of March 2025, [PEP 751](https://peps.python.org/pep-0751) defined a standard

Reviewer 2: My personal preference is to leave dates out unless they are significant to the information provided. They quickly become old enough to be irrelevant.

done manually. For example, calling `uv add numpy` will automatically create a
`uv.lock` file, setup the environment, and install numpy.
2) **Update** - This is not done automatically by package managers.
Maintainers can choose to do this manually or setup their own automated
workflow. Updates can be for specific packages or all dependencies.
3) **Reformat** - Package managers currently use native formats (e.g.
uv uses `uv.lock`) and provide tools for converting into `pylock.toml` and other
formats (e.g. `requirements.txt`) when needed

Below is the uv CLI workflow for lock files:

```sh
# Create a uv.lock file based on pyproject.toml
> uv lock

# Update uv.lock
> uv lock --upgrade
> uv lock --upgrade-package pandas

# Install packages into environment based on uv.lock
> uv sync

# PEP 751 pylock.toml support
> uv export --format pylock.toml -o pylock.toml # export uv.lock -> pylock.toml
> uv pip sync pylock.toml                       # install from pylock.toml
```
See [official docs](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/concepts/projects/sync/) for more
details. See also the relevant docs for [Poetry](
https://python-poetry.org/docs/basic-usage/#installing-dependencies) and

> [PDM](https://pdm-project.org/latest/usage/lockfile/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[PDM](https://pdm-project.org/latest/usage/lockfile/) if you use those package managers.
```

How to specify dependencies
When you use different specifiers
:::

## Dependency Locking

In addition to declaring dependencies in `pyproject.toml`, it is common for
packages to lock down exact versions of all their dependencies in a separate
lock file. A lock file provides benefits of reproducibility, security, and
potentially faster installs, among other things. Pinning the exact dependency
versions used in a project eliminates "works on my machine" bugs and gives CI a
reproducible baseline. For applications meant to be run rather than imported,
lock files also ensure anyone installing the project gets a known-good set of
dependencies instead of whatever happens to be latest.

### `pyproject.toml` vs lock file
* `pyproject.toml`: defines all supported environments for users importing
your package into their project.

> * **lock file**: defines a specific environment used for development

Reviewer 2: I really like your motivation section, a few notes on the small details, take these as suggestions

- pyproject.toml: "defines the widest possible set of environments". Ideally yes, all supported, but I don't want readers to feel they must either validate every possible combination (impossible) or list only a few known-to-work configurations.
- pylock.toml: "used for deployment" I think development is the wrong word choice here, as it is only during active development that the lock files should actually be changing, or not even used but instead installing from requirements to see what changes will be required. Yes, basing CI off of lock files makes for more reproducible checks, but that can be seen as a necessary step in the release process that is validating the lock file tied to the next release as much as the code in that release. I would like to focus the lock file motivation more on deploying and releasing (even if it is a pre-release) than on development workflow.

The way I see it, pyproject should strive to eliminate false-negatives, denying users the ability to install software because is doesn't fit their environment; this will create some false-positives, where it was installed but won't work. pylock, on the other hand, should reduce false-positives, if it installs the environment is known-good, but this disallows installing into unknown-good environments and restricts deployment possibilities.

Reviewer: > pyproject should strive to eliminate false-negatives. pylock, on the other hand, should reduce false-positives

+1 here, this is a good framing. 

i am not sure i am getting your point in the second bullet, but maybe one distinction (that i don't think is being made yet) is between application-like things and library-like things, where when i am using an application-like thing i do indeed run from the lockfile in deployment, but not in library-like things (mostly as a byproduct of how python's import machinery/historical reasons/etc. that's mostly a digression). not sure if that would be a useful distinction or TMI as a motivating example of how lockfiles are used/how their use depends on how the package is used.

Author: I also like the false-positive/false-negative framing. Added a paragraph below the bullet summary to give more nuance. 68c6446104f45653570bc9337cdb48c139d271a5

By "supporting" I didn't intend it to mean "validated via testing" so I also clarified that "supporting" is about a commitment from maintainers (e.g. to respond to issue tickets related to something not working that pyproject.toml says should work)

Regarding the second bullet, I wouldn't say a lock file is _for_ deploying and releasing. I see your example as highlighting that a lock file is worked on most during deploying and releasing so that it can be used for development and CI going forward.

Reviewer 2: I still see the point of adopting a lock file as primarily to aid in deployment (even if that is deployment into a CI container). But I won't raise this point again.

The new paragraphs are a great addition.

done manually. For example, calling `uv add numpy` will automatically create a
`uv.lock` file, setup the environment, and install numpy.
2) **Update** - This is not done automatically by package managers.
Maintainers can choose to do this manually or setup their own automated
workflow. Updates can be for specific packages or all dependencies.
3) **Reformat** - Package managers currently use native formats (e.g.
uv uses `uv.lock`) and provide tools for converting into `pylock.toml` and other
formats (e.g. `requirements.txt`) when needed

Below are common package manager CLI workflows for lock files:

::::{tab-set}

:::{tab-item} uv (recommended)
```sh
# Create a uv.lock file based on pyproject.toml
> uv lock

# Update uv.lock
> uv lock --upgrade
> uv lock --upgrade-package pandas

# Install packages into environment based on uv.lock
> uv sync

# PEP 751 pylock.toml support
> uv export --format pylock.toml -o pylock.toml # export uv.lock -> pylock.toml
> uv pip sync pylock.toml                       # install from pylock.toml
```
See [official docs](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/concepts/projects/sync/) for more details
:::

> :::{tab-item} Poetry

Reviewer 2: I'm not convinced we should be adding a mini-tutorial for every tool. This guide is meant to provide a single happy path for packaging and this seems distracting. We also don't use poetry or pdm anywhere else in the guide (we use hatch, which can use pip or uv underneath, so the uv [pip] section would seem to cover all those cases).

Reviewer 2: Maybe adding some data to the comparison table would be a better place https://github.com/pyOpenSci/python-package-guide/blob/072e979670ac48f26e0824b2c9a47fa434367512/package-structure-code/python-package-build-tools.md?plain=1#L210

Reviewer: if we take these out, maybe links to the relevant docs? i think it's useful to see that the same concepts apply across different packaging frontends, but yeah maybe we don't need to write and maintain tutorials for each tool.

Author: Happy to keep things focused. Removed lock file examples but kept links: 6c5d6fb02848cf2d80bdb3ab48569c265d167913

See [official docs](https://python-poetry.org/docs/basic-usage/#installing-dependencies) for more details
:::

:::{tab-item} PDM
```sh
# Create a pdm.lock file based on pyproject.toml
> pdm lock

# Update pdm.lock
> pdm update
> pdm update pandas numpy

# Install packages into environment based on pdm.lock
> pdm sync

# PEP 751 pylock.toml support
> pdm export -f pylock -o pylock.toml  # export pdm.lock -> pylock.toml
```
See [official docs](https://pdm-project.org/latest/usage/lockfile/) for more details
:::

::::

### Should I use a lock file?

Most package managers will generate a lock file automatically for you (e.g. uv,
Poetry, PDM). The real question is when you version control the lock file as
part of your package.

:::{admonition} Recommendation: Versioning a lock file
:class: tip
If your project is an application others use directly, include a lock file as
the recommended environment.

If your project is a library to be used in other projects and it is mature
enough to have CI, include a lock file for CI and contributors. For a small
library only you maintain that is shared amongst people you know, waiting to add
a lock file is not an issue.
:::

> There is some maintenance cost from lock files. Maintainers should aim to update

Reviewer 2: I think we need to address best practices of _which_ lock file to keep in VCS. You mentioned the native and universal formats supported by tools, but at most one should be committed. The question is then which one is our best practice for application developers?

Reviewer: imo we should recommend pylock bc it's the standard (and using it ubiquitously would definitely be a better situation for ecosystem at large than continuing to use frontend-specific lockfiles)

Author: Agreed. Added new recommendation box: dd0e3a7695ba10ddc5dafdc1c47cf97931989f86

support dependency cooldowns to mitigate this.

:::{admonition} Recommendation: Updating a lock file
:class: tip
Update lock files frequently (e.g. weekly) but configure a dependency cooldown
of several days to avoid automatically installing the latest packages. Only
override the cooldown if a new package has a needed bug fix or security
patch.
:::

::::{dropdown} Dependency cooldowns
:icon: info
:color: primary
[Dependency cooldowns](
https://blog.pypi.org/posts/2026-04-02-incident-report-litellm-telnyx-supply-chain-attack/#dependency-cooldowns
) are strongly encouraged by security experts to avoid automatically downloading
the latest package updates that may have been compromised with malware. Package
manager tools are starting to support configurations for cooldowns
```sh
> uv lock --exclude-newer "3 days"`
```
or in `pyproject.toml`
```toml
[tool.uv]
exclude-newer = "3 days"
```

Integrating cooldown constrained lock files into CI is important since this is
where new packages are commonly tested first. Automated testing code that
resolves `[project.dependencies]` every time
```sh
> python -m pip install .
```
can be replaced with
```sh

> > uv lock --exclude-newer "3 days"`

Reviewer 2: How can an install command be entirely replaced by a lock command?

Author: Good catch. Should be `uv sync`: 1ce130db3fedaebe2cf66f0496a7e3dd46b35d23

Reviewer 2: Yes, but you changed the wrong example. Ln629 didn't have to change, both are valid though. This ln670 is still not an appropriate replacement for `pip install`.

Author: Doh! Fixed: 4283dc0ff358cb5484a910ee6df8b66552dc5983
Also replaced it with pylock.toml based install (instead of uv.lock) to be consistent with the prior recommendation.

```
or can be replaced with lock file based installations
```sh
> uv sync --frozen
```
Support for this varies across automated testing frameworks (e.g. hatch, nox) so
consult their documentation for how to install dependencies from lock files with
dependency cooldowns.
::::

When you decide to update a lock file, make sure to test that the resulting
environment works before committing. If it fails because of some dependency
update, then it may be necessary to update `pyproject.toml` to cap the supported
versions of that dependency unless/until the code can be updated to support it.

It can also be good, though not necessary, to double check what changed when
updating a lock file. The diff can be noisy so the main changes to focus on are
1) major version updates (e.g.  `pandas 2.X.X` -> `pandas 3.X.X`)
2) new transitive dependencies (i.e. not part of your `pyproject.toml`)

:::{tip}

> A lock file captures one tested environment, not the full compatibility range

Reviewer 2: Ambitiously, yes. More realistically, a lock file can be presumed to be a valid resolution to the set of dependencies that will work with this code. Whether or not testing was done in that environment is not captured by a lock file.

Reviewer: (this might be my fault, i was thinking of this as motivation for lockfile: if you have CI logs by commit, then what you have is a complete versioned record of state of code + dependencies + tests, but that might be too subtle/unnecessary)

Author: Changed to "A lock file captures one environment for CI testing, ...": cab5fd5ebae56e75405481025f9aefd470b4e75c

enough to have CI, include a lock file for CI and contributors. For a small
library only you maintain that is shared amongst people you know, waiting to add
a lock file is not an issue.
In general, you should version the lock file.

> For private libraries shared within a team, a lock file is less important. But

Reviewer 2: I would not call attention to this. I don't see any advantage to recommending, however softly, that teams don't adopt lock files.
